what's the old saying physician heal
thyself Wednesday's opinions are a class
of medications typically used to treat
anxiety and insomnia they include things
like xanax valium klonopin when we went
back to Toronto our family physician
prescribed benzodiazepines one of the
fascinating things about Ben's days
means in the past let's say twenty years
is that there's been a steady increase
in prescribing in fact since about 1999
benzodiazepine prescriptions had
increased about 67 percent and is
something called zopiclone mo vein and I
hardly took the Emma vein at all maybe
four or five times but I took the
benzodiazepine the way that it was
prescribed to twice a day point to five
milligrams and that seemed to bring the
symptoms to a pretty rapid halt which is
also part of the reason I didn't need
the in vain and then there are so many
other things going on around me at that
time that I never really thought about
it again
there's also been a sevenfold increase
in benzodiazepine related mortality
since 1999
and so what I've written about is that I
really think that benzodiazepines are
like the hidden epidemic there's been
all this national attention awareness
around opioids and how they can cause
death and all kinds of other adverse
health outcomes including addiction but
we read very little about
benzodiazepines and the fact that they
are highly addictive that they can cause
death that they cause all kinds of other
adverse health outcomes I develop
symptoms that I now recognized were
associated with its use weakness on the
my left side and like a feeling of
detachment from people around me people
I loved some decrease in the ability to
experience joy but it wasn't until much
later that I actually associated with
the pince-nez being used now the first
drug that was tested in his new era was
salmon's alprazolam for panic disorder
okay and here was the study they
conducted that it was for panic attacks
it was xanax versus a placebo group and
after four weeks
xanax was doing better okay but it
wasn't a four-week study the way that
physicians typically prescribed Dawn's
Daisy beans to patients is contrary to
how they are recommended to be
prescribed by the FDA almost all been
stays epeans are recommended to be used
only short-term now how we define
short-term is sort of in the eyes of the
beholder but generally when we're
thinking short-term we're thinking you
know on the order of days two weeks not
months two years at eight weeks the
alprazolam patients were doing no better
than placebo patients okay and then from
eight weeks to 14 weeks westward and you
went through the drug because we knew
benzodiazepines redic
so they had to have a withdrawal phase
at the end of 14 weeks that xaniix
patients were doing worse than they were
at the beginning and much much worse
than the placebo patients okay the trial
told of harm done it told that people
who are gonna get addicted when they
came off they'd had so all sorts of
withdrawal symptoms and some people
unable to get off
and yet we commonly see in the medical
profession physicians who prescribe
benzodiazepines to patients has a sort
of one-way ticket they start the
prescription the patient starts taking
it the patient endorses that they feel
better and 20 years later they're still
on that Ben's days pain and often at a
higher dose so I asked my doctor to
increase the benzodiazepine dose but
what seemed to happen as a consequence
of that was that I just got more anxious
like so again in retrospect it seems
like I had a rather uncommon but not
unheard of reaction to benzodiazepines
where increased dose makes anxiety worse
instead of better so then at one point
when things weren't getting better and
Tami was still in the hospital I was
trying to take care of her we had lots
of help I stopped taking them entirely
and tried ketamine which is a treatment
for depression while that neither of
those were very good ideas as it turned
out what did they report what did
American psychiatry report they didn't
report the eight-week results they
focused on the four-week results because
that was a story that told of an
effective new treatment for panic
disorder they basically glided oh you
know didn't talk about the eight-week
results in the abstracts and completely
hid the 14 week results so what's the
evidence base these are effective for
panic disorder but I continued my sort
of downhill spiral and ended up in a
clinic in on the eastern seaboard that
claim they could do a rapid yeah
benzodiazepine detox which was a
complete bloody lie yeah well what we
figured was we didn't realize that there
was this physical dependency until you
stopped to try and do the Academy
and then we tried tapering and you
couldn't stand it because of the
akathisia and so we thought well let's
go get some professional help right and
well and I went to the clinic on the
understanding that they could do a
multi-day detoxification and treatment
for withdrawal and when I got there what
they told me instead was that they'd
substitute essentially they'd substitute
one benzodiazepine for another which
wasn't the least bit helpful because
clonazepam was already a long-acting
benzodiazepine and they're easier to
wean off than the shorter acting
benzodiazepines and they had nothing to
offer essentially I came out of that
clinic worse than I when I went in
so like significantly worse yes on to
more sedative like drugs in order to
dampen down the akathisia
symptoms rights which wasn't helping
much there is there is a body of
literature now that shows that these
drugs do leave lasting for many many
people leave lasting cognitive deficits
no I'm thinking of a study where people
would you the study I was going to say
talk about whether people were using
multiple drugs over the years benzos and
some people were using opiates and some
people using stimulants and the loss of
brain function was the greatest and the
people using the benzos especially
compared to people using the opiates you
and Andre your husband took me out of
that hospital and we went to Russia of
all places near Moscow to try a
treatment offered by clinic there that
used they use propofol and xtour right
right proper fall to as a heavy heavy
sedating agent it basically made me
unconscious for nine days and it's so
strange was we're now in Serbia weirdly
enough in Belgrade of all bloody places
and we've been here about two weeks and
went to
yet another specialty clinic run by an
anesthesiologist and they modified the
medication that I was taking in Florida
which is where we were last and I don't
know I can't understand it but virtually
all my symptoms have disappeared for
someone who's not taking benzos I would
go to great lengths to convince them
never to do it it's not a good idea they
can affect the performance in school on
the job devastating in terms of driving
people can be as impaired with benzos
driving as they would be with alcohol so
all of the side effects that you
associate with alcohol and young people
can also occur with benzos and the
combination of the two is additive
what's the old saying physician heal
thyself
[Music]